>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JULY 8:
INTERNATIONAL LEADERS WRAP UP
THEIR GROUP OF 20 SUMMIT IN
HAMBURG, GERMANY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SEATTLE POLICE RETRAINING TO
REDUCE THEIR USE OF LETHAL
FORCE.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GLOBAL SECURITY AND TRADE
DOMINATED THE TWO-DAY SUMMIT OF
LEADERS FROM 20 NATIONS THAT
CONCLUDED IN GERMANY TODAY.
THE G20 MEETING IN HAMBURG DREW
LARGE CROWDS OF PROTESTERS, AS
THESE GATHERINGS ALWAYS DO.
BUT THAT DID NOT DISRUPT THE
BUSINESS INSIDE.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT RYAN CHILCOTE IS
THERE WITH MORE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, PRESIDENT
TRUMP MET WITH KEY ASIAN ALLIES
TO DISCUSS THE ONGOING THREAT
POSED BY NORTH KOREA AND ITS
LONG-RANGE MISSILE PROGRAM.
JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER SHINZO
ABE CALLED THE SITUATION
"INCREASINGLY SEVERE."
IN A SEPARATE MEETING WITH
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING,
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID OF NORTH
KOREA'S CONTINUING WEAPONS
TESTS, "SOMETHING HAS TO BE DONE
ABOUT IT."
THE LEADERS ALSO DISCUSSED TRADE
DEALS AND THE $30 BILLION-A-
MONTH U.S. TRADE DEFICIT WITH
CHINA.
>> MANY THINGS HAVE HAPPENED
THAT HAVE LED TO TRADE
IMBALANCES, AND WE'RE GOING TO
TURN THAT AROUND.
>> Reporter: MEETING WITH
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER THERESA
MAY, MR .TRUMP SAID THE U.S.
AND U.K. WERE ALSO WORKING ON
WHAT HE CALLED A "VERY POWERFUL"
TRADE DEAL, AS THE U.K. PLANS
ITS EXIT FROM THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
>> PRIME MINISTER MAY AND I HAVE
DEVELOPED A VERY SPECIAL
RELATIONSHIP, AND I THINK TRADE
WILL BE A VERY BIG FACTOR
BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES, SO I
WANT TO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: IN THE SUMMIT'S
FINAL COMMUNIQUE, 19 OF THE 20
NATIONS-- ALL BUT THE UNITED
STATES-- VOWED TO IMPLEMENT
QUICKLY AND WITHOUT EXCEPTIONS
THE PARIS CLIMATE ACCORD TO
REDUCE CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS
THAT CAUSE GLOBAL WARMING.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAID THE U.S. POSITION IS
"REGRETTABLE."
>> (translated): THEREFORE,
THERE IS THE POSITION OF THE
UNITED STATES ON THE ONE HAND,
BUT I AM VERY HAPPY THAT ALL
OTHER G20 HEADS OF STATES AND
GOVERNMENT HAVE AGREED THAT THE
PARIS AGREEMENT IS IRREVERSIBLE.
>> Reporter: MERKEL PLAYED DOWN
THE MOMENT WHEN FIRST DAUGHTER
IVANKA TRUMP SAT IN FOR THE
PRESIDENT DURING A MEETING ABOUT
MIGRATION AND HEALTH IN AFRICA.
THE PRESIDENT SAID THE U.S.
WOULD GIVE $50 MILLION TO A
A WORLD BANK FUND FOR WOMEN
ENTREPRENEURS IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES.
FOLLOWING YESTERDAY'S MARATHON
MEETING BETWEEN PRESIDENT TRUMP
AND RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN, I ASKED MR. PUTIN TODAY
IF HE FELT MR. TRUMP HAD
AGREED WITH HIS ASSERTION THAT
RUSSIA HAD NOT INTERVENED IN THE
U.S. ELECTION LAST YEAR.
>> (translated): HE WAS REALLY
INTERESTED IN THE DETAILS.
I REPLIED AS DETAILED AS I
COULD.
I THINK HE WAS SATISFIED WITH MY
ANSWERS.
OUR POSITION IS KNOWN.
THERE ARE NO GROUNDS FOR SAYING
RUSSIA INTERFERED IN THE U.S.
ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT RYAN CHILCOTE
JOINS ME NOW FROM HAMBURG,
GERMANY.
RYAN, LET'S START WITH THAT
MEETING BETWEEN VLADIMIR PUTIN
AND PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP.
WHO CONTROLLED THE NARRATIVE
AFTERWARDS ON WHAT EXACTLY
HAPPENED THERE?
>> Reporter: WHAT WE CAN SAY
IS THAT, AT LEAST FROM THE
RUSSIAN SIDE, THERE WAS MORE OF
A NARRATIVE.
IF YOU THINK ABOUT IT, ALMOST
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING PRESIDENT
TRUMP AND PRESIDENT PUTIN'S
MEETING, THE RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER GAVE A PRESS CONFERENCE
THAT WAS BROADCAST LIVE ON
RUSSIAN TV.
ON THE U.S. SIDE, U.S. SECRETARY
OF STATE REX TILLERSON A WHILE
LATER ADDRESSED U.S. REPORTERS,
BUT IT WAS AUDIO ONLY.
THEN, IF YOU THINK ABOUT TODAY,
PRESIDENT PUTIN GAVE A PRESS
CONFERENCE AS HE WAS LEAVING.
HE ANSWERED A QUESTION FROM
ME.
HE TOO SAID THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP
BY THE WAY, IT WAS HIS
IMPRESSION, AGREED THAT RUSSIA
HADN'T INTERVENED IN THE
ELECTION.
WHILE AS THE U.S. DELEGATION,
PRESIDENT TRUMP SIMPLY LEFT.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE A PRESS
CONFERENCE AT ALL.
SO THE RUSSIANS HAVE CERTAINLY
BEEN TALKING ABOUT THE MEETING A
LOT MORE.
AND I THINK, YOU KNOW, THAT'S
GIVEN THEM AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SHAPE HOW PEOPLE CHARACTERIZE
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
STORY LINES THAT WE'VE ALSO BEEN
SEEING ARE IMAGES OF THE
PROTESTS THAT HAVE BEEN
HAPPENING IN HAMBURG.
HOW SIGNIFICANT HAVE THEY BEEN?
>> I THINK IT'S FAIR TO SAY THAT
THE PROTESTS HERE-- AND I'VE
BEEN TO MANY, MANY, MANY G20s,
G7s-- HAVE REALLY ENGULFED THIS
CITY.
AND IT'S A BIG CITY, RIGHT?
THIS IS GERMANY'S SECOND LARGEST
CITY.
IT'S REALLY QUITE LARGE, AND
THESE PROTESTS WERE EVERYWHERE.
EVERYONE SAID BEFORE THIS SUMMIT
BEGAN THAT IT WAS A GAMBLE ON
ANGELA MERKEL, THE GERMAN
CHANCELLOR'S PART TO HAVE THIS,
TO HAVE THE SUMMIT HERE IN THIS
CITY AS OPPOSED AS THEY OFTEN DO
ON SOME REMOTE ISLAND WHERE IT'S
DIFFICULT FOR PROTESTERS TO DO
IT.
BUT APPARENTLY SHE WANTED TO
SEND A MESSAGE TO PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN AND OTHER LEADERS THAT
GERMANY IS A DEMOCRATIC COUNTRY
AND THIS IS GOING TO GO AHEAD.
WHICH IS ONE OF THE REASONS WHY
THEY DIDN'T CRACK DOWN AS MUCH
AS THEY COULD ON SOME OF THESE
PROTESTERS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
WAY TO JUDGE THE STANDING OF THE
UNITED STATES, GIVEN THAT THIS
IS NOW THE PRESIDENT'S... ONE OF
HIS FIRST MAJOR INTERNATIONAL
FORAYS?
>> WELL, THERE'S A REAL
QUALITATIVE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
WHAT WE'VE SEEN AT THIS SUMMIT
WHEN IT COMES TO U.S. LEADERSHIP
AND HOW EVERYONE HAS SORT OF
PERCEIVED AND RECEIVED THE U.S.,
FROM THE OTHER SUMMITS HAV BEEN.
THIS SUMMIT HAS BEEN MOSTLY
ABOUT OTHER G20 LEADERS TRYING
TO CONVINCE THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION TO FIND SOME
MIDDLE GROUND WITH THEM ON
ISSUES LIKE TRADE, AND
PARTICULARLY ON THE ISSUE OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
SO IT'S A REAL STARK CHANGE FROM
WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN THE PAST.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, RYAN
CHILCOTE JOINING US TONIGHT
FROM HAMBURG, GERMANY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ADDITION TO
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S MEETINGS WITH
ASIAN LEADERS, THE U.S. MILITARY
GAVE NORTH KOREA A SHOW OF FORCE
TODAY, BY PARTICIPATING IN
MILITARY DRILLS IN SOUTH KOREA.
A PAIR OF B-1 BOMBERS CONDUCTED
A SIMULATED ATTACK ON AN "ENEMY"
MISSILE LAUNCHER AT A TEST-RANGE
IN SOUTH KOREA.
THE BOMBERS, BASED ON THE ISLAND
OF GUAM, WERE ESCORTED BY OTHER
U.S. FORCE PLANES, AS WELL AS
SOUTH KOREAN AND JAPANESE
FIGHTER PLANES THAT CONDUCTED
THEIR OWN SIMULATED ATTACKS.
THE SHOW OF FORCE COMES FOUR
DAYS AFTER NORTH KOREA TEST-
LAUNCHED A TYPE OF
INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC
MISSILE THAT SOME EXPERTS
BELIEVE COULD REACH ALASKA AND
HAWAII.
THE G20 SUMMIT HAS YIELDED
ANOTHER SUPERPOWER-BROKERED PLAN
FOR A CEASEFIRE IN SYRIA'S SIX-
YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
DUE TO TAKE EFFECT TOMORROW AT
NOON DAMASCUS TIME, THIS
CEASEFIRE INCLUDES THE FIRST
JOINT PEACEKEEPING EFFORT BY THE
U.S. AND RUSSIA.
RUSSIAN ARMED FORCES HAVE BACKED
SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD, WHILE THE U.S. MILITARY
HAS SUPPORTED REBELS TRYING TO
OUST HIM.
BOTH COUNTRIES, AND ASSAD, SAY
THEY'RE TRYING TO CRUSH ISIS
MILITANTS INSIDE SYRIA, TOO.
IN HAMBURG, SECRETARY OF STATE
REX TILLERSON SAID THE CEASEFIRE
COVERS THE REGION OF SOUTHWEST
SYRIA BORDERING JORDAN, WHICH
ALSO HAD A ROLE IN BROKERING THE
DEAL.
IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT MILITARY
COMMANDERS SAY THE U.S.-BACKED
OFFENSIVE TO RECAPTURE IRAQ'S
SECOND-LARGEST CITY, MOSUL, FROM
ISIS MILITANTS IS ONLY HOURS
AWAY FROM SUCCEEDING.
IRAQI ARMY SOLDIERS CELEBRATED
AND RAISED A FLAG ATOP A
RECAPTURED BUILDING IN MOSUL'S
OLD CITY TODAY.
THE REMAINING ISIS MILITANTS
VOWED A FIGHT TO THE DEATH, AND
FEWER THAN 300 OF THEM ARE
BELIEVED TO BE HOLDING OUT IN A
TINY SLICE OF WEST MOSUL.
SINCE THE OFFENSIVE BEGAN EIGHT
MONTHS AGO, AID GROUPS SAY THE
FIGHTING HAS DISPLACED ALMOST
ONE MILLION CIVILIANS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS CURRENTLY
OVERSEEING REFORMS OF 14 LOCAL
POLICE DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, INCLUDING BALTIMORE,
CLEVELAND, CHICAGO, AND
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, AS WELL AS
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO, AND
PORTLAND, OREGON.
THESE DEPARTMENTS CAME UNDER
SCRUTINY BECAUSE OF HIGH
PROFILE, FATAL POLICE-INVOLVED
SHOOTINGS, AS WELL AS COMPLAINTS
OF RACIALLY-BIASED POLICING.
ONE CITY THAT'S PURSUED REFORMS
FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS IS
SEATTLE, WASHINGTON.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JOANNE JENNINGS
WENT THERE TO SEE HOW THE
REFORMS ARE WORKING, AND THE
ONGOING CHALLENGES IN THE WAKE
OF THE MOST RECENT SHOOTING.
A WARNING: SOME VIEWERS MAY FIND
IMAGES IN THIS STORY DISTURBING.
>> Reporter: THE RETRAINING
OF SEATTLE'S POLICE DEPARTMENT
WAS SPARKED BY THIS FATAL
POLICE-INVOLVED SHOOTING IN
2010.
JOHN T. WILLIAMS, A NATIVE
AMERICAN WOODCARVER, SEEN IN
THIS PATROL CAR VIDEO CROSSING
THE STREET, WAS ORDERED TO DROP
A KNIFE HE WAS CARRYING FOR HIS
CRAFT.
POLICE OFFICER IAN BIRK GAVE
WILLIAMS, WHO WAS HARD OF
HEARING, JUST FOUR SECONDS
WARNING BEFORE OPENING FIRE.
>> PUT THE KNIFE DOWN!
(GUNSHOTS)
>> Reporter: IT WAS THE EIGHTH
FATAL POLICE-INVOLVED SHOOTING
BY SEATTLE POLICE IN FIVE YEARS,
AND THE 25th IN A DECADE.
BIRK RESIGNED FROM THE FORCE BUT
WAS NOT PROSECUTED.
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
LAUNCHED AN INVESTIGATION.
IT FOUND THAT SEATTLE POLICE HAD
ENGAGED IN A "PATTERN OR
PRACTICE OF USING UNNECESSARY OR
EXCESSIVE FORCE," AND RAISED
"SERIOUS CONCERNS ABOUT BIASED
POLICING."
IN 2012, THE CITY OF SEATTLE
SETTLED THE PROBE WITH A CONSENT
DECREE, AGREEING TO COURT-
MONITORED REFORMS TO MINIMIZE
USE-OF-FORCE INCIDENTS NOT ONLY
WITH GUNS BUT WITH TASERS AND
BATONS.
FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS, SEATTLE
POLICE OFFICERS HAVE RETRAINED
HOW TO APPROACH SOMEONE IN
CRISIS OR SHOWING SIGNS OF
MENTAL ILLNESS.
IN THIS SCENARIO, THEY'RE TRYING
TO STOP A MAN FROM RUNNING
THROUGH TRAFFIC.
>> SIR, OFFICER STEVENS, SEATTLE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WHAT'S YOUR NAME?
>> Reporter: AT TIMES, IT SOUNDS
MORE LIKE A PSYCHOLOGY CLASS.
>> THIS IS JUST TOO MUCH.
>> HEY, BROTHER, IT SOUNDS LIKE
YOU'RE INCREDIBLY OVERWHELMED.
I THINK JOB LOSS IS TOUGH FOR
ALL OF US.
>> Reporter: THE GOAL HERE IS TO
DE-ESCALATE THE SITUATION.
>> YOU GOT TO ANALYZE IT FROM
BOTH SIDES.
>> Reporter: TRAINER ANDREW
MARVEL SAYS SLOWING THINGS DOWN
REDUCES THE CHANCES OF A VIOLENT
ENCOUNTER.
>> IF WE HAVE SITUATIONS THAT
POTENTIALLY COULD GO BAD AND
COULD POTENTIALLY RESULT IN SOME
TYPE OF LETHAL FORCE BEING USED,
IF OUR OFFICERS CAN RECOGNIZE
THAT AHEAD OF TIME, THOSE
SITUATIONS, USE GOOD TACTICS,
USE GOOD VERBAL SKILLS, AND
INCORPORATE SOME TEAMWORK IN
THERE, WE END UP REDUCING THOSE
SITUATIONS.
>> Reporter: ALL SEATTLE
POLICE OFFICERS ARE REQUIRED TO
TAKE THIS FOUR-HOUR CRISIS
INTERVENTION TRAINING ONCE A
YEAR.
THAT'S ON TOP OF AN EIGHT-HOUR
COURSE NOW MANDATED FOR ALL
ROOKIE OFFICERS IN WASHINGTON
STATE.
SOME SEATTLE OFFICERS VOLUNTEER
FOR AN EXTRA 40-HOUR COURSE TO
JOIN SPECIAL CRISIS INTERVENTION
TEAMS DISPATCHED IN THESE TYPES
OF SITUATIONS.
>> YOU GUYS DON'T EVEN KNOW
WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> I'LL FEEL MORE COMFORTABLE IF
WE CAN TALK WITHOUT YOU HOLDING
THE KNIFE, BECAUSE IT IS A
LITTLE SCARY.
>> HERE, WE TYPICALLY DISPLAY
INFORMATION ABOUT UNITS THAT ARE
ON PATROL, WHAT'S HAPPENING...
>> Reporter: THE SEATTLE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, BRIAN MAXEY, SAYS
BETTER DATA COLLECTION ABOUT
POLICE ENCOUNTERS SHOWS THE
TRAINING IS WORKING.
>> WHAT WE'RE FINDING OUT IS
THAT, WITH THE 10,000 CONTACTS
WE HAVE WITH PEOPLE IN SEVERE
CRISIS EVERY YEAR, OFFICERS ARE
ONLY USING FORCE 1.6% OF THE
TIME.
THAT IS REMARKABLY LOW BECAUSE
THIS IS THE MOST VOLATILE
POPULATION THAT OFFICERS ENGAGE
WITH.
OF THAT 1.6%, ONLY ABOUT HALF OF
THAT IS ANY KIND OF SERIOUS USE
OF FORCE.
>> Reporter: THIS APRIL, THE
COURT-APPOINTED MONITOR
OVERSEEING SEATTLE'S CONSENT
DECREE FOUND A 60% REDUCTION IN
USE OF FORCE BY POLICE BETWEEN
2014 AND 2016.
JUST A WEEK BEFORE THAT REPORT,
ATTORNEY GENERAL JEFF SESSIONS
ORDERED A REVIEW OF ALL OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION CONSENT DECREES,
WHICH HE SAYS VILIFY POLICE AND
REDUCE THEIR MORALE.
>> FOR SEATTLE, SESSIONS' THREAT
IS AN EMPTY THREAT.
>> Reporter: SEATTLE'S
DEMOCRATIC MAYOR, ED MURRAY,
SAYS FEDERAL OVERSIGHT HAS BEEN
ESSENTIAL.
>> THE IDEA THAT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT WOULD STEP BACK FROM
BEING A... BASICALLY AN HONEST
BROKER BETWEEN COMMUNITIES OF
COLOR AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS IN
CITIES HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BE
EXPLOSIVE.
THIS IS A ROLE THAT THEY'VE
PLAYED SINCE THE 1960s, AND I
THINK THAT OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT
TODAY IS A BETTER POLICE
DEPARTMENT BECAUSE THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT CAME IN, BECAUSE THE
FEDERAL MONITOR WAS APPOINTED.
>> SO, IF OTHER COMMISSIONERS
COULD COME TOMORROW MORNING...
>> Reporter: SEATTLE'S CONSENT
DECREE ALSO CREATED A COMMUNITY
POLICE COMMISSION TO ADVISE THE
COURT ON PROGRESS IMPLEMENTING
REFORMS.
THE TRUST SEATTLE POLICE HAVE
BEEN TRYING TO BUILD WAS SHAKEN
LAST MONTH BY THE DEATH OF
CHARLEENA LYLES.
ACCORDING TO HER FAMILY, THE
30-YEAR-OLD BLACK SINGLE MOTHER
HAD A HISTORY OF MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES.
ON SUNDAY MORNING, JUNE 18,
LYLES CALLED 911 TO REPORT A
BURGLARY.
WHEN TWO WHITE SEATTLE POLICE
OFFICERS ARRIVED AT HER
APARTMENT, THE CONVERSATION AT
FIRST WAS CALM, AS YOU CAN HEAR
IN THIS POLICE RECORDING.
>>SOMEONE BROKE INTO MY HOUSE
AND TOOK MY THINGS.
>> Reporter: THE SITUATION
DETERIORATED RAPIDLY WHEN LYLES
ALLEGEDLY BRANDISHED TWO KITCHEN
KNIVES.
>>HEY, GET BACK.
>>TAZE HER.
>>I DON'T HAVE A TASER.
>>WE NEED HELP.
WE'VE GOT A WOMAN WITH TWO
KNIVES.
>>HEY, GET BACK.
>>GET BACK.
(GUNSHOTS)
>> Reporter: WITH THREE OF HER
FOUR CHILDREN IN THE NEXT ROOM,
BOTH OFFICERS FIRED THEIR GUNS,
HITTING LYLES SEVEN TIMES.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT SAYS
NEITHER HAD A TASER, BUT THEY
WERE CARRYING EITHER A BATON OR
PEPPER SPRAY, AND BOTH HAD
UNDERGONE CRISIS INTERVENTION
TRAINING.
>> CHARLEENA!
>> WHAT'S HER NAME?
>> Reporter: THOUGH THE
INVESTIGATION INTO LYLES' DEATH
HAS JUST BEGUN, THE OUTRAGE HAS
BEEN IMMEDIATE.
>> WE WILL STAND UP, ONE AND
UNITED, TO PRESSURE THIS CITY TO
CHANGE ITS BEHAVIOR IN POLICING.
>> Reporter: FOR COMMUNITY
ACTIVIST ANDRE TAYLOR, THIS
PROTEST WAS ALL TOO FAMILIAR.
LAST YEAR, SEATTLE POLICE SHOT
AND KILLED HIS BROTHER, CHE,
WHOM THEY HAD SUSPECTED OF
ILLEGALLY POSSESSING A FIREARM.
POLICE DASH CAM VIDEO SHOWS
THREE WHITE OFFICERS APPROACHING
HIS VEHICLE.
CHE WAS FACING THE OPEN
PASSENGER DOOR.
THE OFFICERS ORDERED HIM TO PUT
HIS HANDS UP, THEN THEY SHOT
HIM.
>> HANDS UP!
(GUNSHOTS)
SHOTS FIRED.
>> Reporter: 18 MONTHS LATER,
THE SHOCK OF THE INCIDENT HAS
NOT LESSENED FOR ANDRE TAYLOR AS
HE SHOWED US AROUND THE SOUTH
SEATTLE NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE HE
GREW UP.
>> IT WASN'T EVEN A MATTER OF
SECONDS BEFORE THEY KILLED HIM.
IT WAS... IT WAS... IT WAS
DEVASTATING, AS SOME OF THE
OTHER SHOOTINGS I'VE SEEN.
>> Reporter: TAYLOR SAYS DESPITE
REFORMS, DISTRUST OF POLICE
REMAINS ENDEMIC IN THE CITY'S
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
HE INTRODUCED US TO A GROUP
GATHERED AT A COMMUNITY CENTER,
COMMISERATING OVER THEIR
INTERACTIONS WITH POLICE.
17-YEAR-OLD JAHILA MOODY SAYS
SHE OFTEN GETS STOPPED BY THE
POLICE.
>> YOU DON'T EVEN HAVE TO HAVE
ANY TYPE OF ALTERCATION WITH THE
POLICE.
YOU COULD JUST BE WALKING DOWN
THE STREET, AND THEY'LL PULL UP
ON YOU, AND THEY'LL BE LIKE,
"WHAT ARE YOU DOING?"
A LOT OF THE TIME, POLICE FEEL
THREATENED BY US BECAUSE THEY
ARE SCARED, NOT BECAUSE WE ARE
SCARED.
>> Reporter: TAYLOR SAYS ANOTHER
FRUSTRATION IS THE LENIENCY THE
LAW AFFORDS POLICE OFFICERS
INVOLVED IN FATAL SHOOTINGS LIKE
HIS BROTHER'S.
DAN SATTERBERG IS THE
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY WHO DECIDED
NOT TO FILE CHARGES AGAINST
THOSE OFFICERS.
THAT'S BECAUSE POLICE WHO
REASONABLY BELIEVE THEIR LIVES
ARE IN DANGER CANNOT BE
CONVICTED.
THAT'S THE LEGAL STANDARD ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
BUT IN WASHINGTON STATE,
PROSECUTORS MUST ALSO PROVE AN
OFFICER SHOWED MALICE.
>> "MALICE" IS NOT A WORD WE USE
A LOT IN CONVERSATION, BUT IT
MEANS AN EVIL INTENT, A DARK
HEART.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THAT TAPE, THAT
VIDEOTAPE, WHEN YOU TALK TO THE
OFFICERS, LOOK INTO THE
INVESTIGATION, CERTAINLY
QUESTIONS ARISE.
COULD THEY HAVE DONE SOMETHING
DIFFERENT?
COULD THEY HAVE MADE A... A
DECISION STRATEGICALLY,
TACTICALLY, TO INTERCEPT MR.
TAYLOR SOMEWHERE OTHER THAN
RIGHT AT THE DOOR OF THE CAR?
I THINK THAT WAS ORIGINALLY
THEIR PLAN TO DO SO.
AND THEN, WHEN HE DIDN'T WALK
AWAY FROM THE CAR, THEY FELT
THEY WERE ALREADY COMMITTED.
SO, WAS THIS PERFECT?
NO.
COULD IT HAVE BEEN DONE BETTER?
YES.
IS THERE MALICE?
THERE'S NO MALICE IN THERE.
>> IT TURNED OUT CHE TAYLOR WAS
NOT HOLDING A GUN, THOUGH POLICE
SAY THEY LATER FOUND THIS
45-CALIBER PISTOL UNDER THE
VEHICLE'S PASSENGER SEAT.
>> IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE A SET OF
FACTS THAT WOULD MEET THE MALICE
STANDARD; YOU'D ALMOST HAVE TO
HAVE A PERSONAL ANIMOSITY
BETWEEN THE OFFICER AND THE
CIVILIAN THAT PRE-EXISTED THE
MOMENT.
BUT EVEN THEN, WE STILL HAVE TO
PROVE THAT SELF-DEFENSE WAS NOT
A MOTIVATING FACTOR AND THAT THE
OFFICER LACKED ALL GOOD FAITH TO
BELIEVE THAT THAT FORCE WAS
NECESSARY.
>> Reporter: A "SEATTLE TIMES"
INVESTIGATION FOUND, OF 213
POLICE-INVOLVED KILLINGS IN
WASHINGTON STATE BETWEEN 2005
AND 2015, NOT ONE OFFICER HAS
BEEN CONVICTED OF WRONGDOING.
SEATTLE POLICE CRISIS
INTERVENTION TRAINER ANDREW
MARVEL SAYS THE HIGH LEGAL
STANDARD IS JUSTIFIED.
>> OFFICERS DO HAVE A HIGHER
THRESHOLD FOR PROSECUTION THAN
THE AVERAGE CITIZEN, AND THAT'S
BECAUSE WE HAVE OFFICERS BEING
ASKED TO MAKE VERY DIFFICULT
DECISIONS IN A VERY SHORT AMOUNT
OF TIME.
NOBODY WINS IF WE GET IT WRONG,
SO THAT'S WHY WE TRAIN AS MUCH
AS WE DO, AND THAT'S WHY WE GET
THE LEVEL OF PROTECTION THAT WE
DO.
>> Reporter: ANDRE TAYLOR IS NOW
LEADING AN EFFORT TO PASS A
BALLOT INITIATIVE NEXT YEAR
CALLED "DE-ESCALATE WASHINGTON."
IT WOULD AMEND STATE LAW TO
REMOVE THE MALICE THRESHOLD WHEN
TRYING TO HOLD OFFICERS
ACCOUNTABLE IF THEY KILL A
CITIZEN IN THE LINE OF DUTY.
>> WE DEMAND THAT, AS EACH AND
EVERY PERSON HAS A JOB AND HAS
SOMEBODY TO LOOK TO, TO BE
ACCOUNTABLE TO, THAT OFFICERS
MUST ALSO HAVE SOMEONE TO BE
ACCOUNTABLE TO.
IN 30 YEARS IN THIS STATE, THEY
HAVEN'T BEEN ACCOUNTABLE TO
NOBODY.
THAT'S A PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: AN OFFICER WHO
WAS SHOT DURING A PROTEST IN
BATON ROUGE LAST YEAR IS SUING
BLACK LIVES MATTER AND ITS
LEADERS, CLAIMING THEY ARE
RESPONSIBLE.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS SUMMER AND
THROUGHOUT THIS YEAR, MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES HAVE CONTINUED TO
FLEE WARS AND PERSECUTION IN THE
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA,
ATTEMPTING TO GET TO EUROPE.
IN THE FIRST HALF OF THIS YEAR,
73,000 REACHED ITALY BY CROSSING
THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
THAT'S A 14% INCREASE FROM LAST
YEAR, ACCORDING TO A NEW REPORT
FROM AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL.
THE REPORT CALLS ATTENTION TO
THE ESTIMATED 2,000 PEOPLE WHO
HAVE DROWNED TRYING TO MAKE THE
CROSSING THIS YEAR, AND
SHORTCOMINGS OF EUROPEAN
GOVERNMENTS COMING TO THEIR
RESCUE.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL'S NAUREEN
SHAH JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON TO DISCUSS THIS.
NAUREEN, IT'S INTERESTING
BECAUSE FOR THE PAST COUPLE OF
YEARS, THERE'S BEEN DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF ATTENTION BEING PAID
TO THIS.
BUT YOU'RE POINTING OUT THAT
THERE ARE STILL MORE PEOPLE
COMING EVEN THOUGH THE
CONDITIONS HAVE GOTTEN WORSE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, HARI.
AND 2017 IS ACTUALLY ON PACE TO
BE THE DEADLIEST YEAR FOR THE
WORLD'S DEADLIEST MIGRATION
ROUTE.
WE'RE SEEING MORE AND MORE
PEOPLE DROWN, AND, AT THE SAME
TIME, EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS
INSTEAD OF STEPPING UP ARE
ACTUALLY TAKING A STEP BACKWARD
AND TRYING TO CEDE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR WHAT'S
HAPPENING TO LOCAL LIBYAN
AUTHORITIES, WHO ARE ACTUALLY
WOEFULLY DYSFUNCTIONAL.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S
CREATING THIS?
IT SEEMED THERE WERE SOME SORT
OF AGREEMENT THAT DIFFERENT
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES WOULD STEP IN
AND TRY TO STEM THIS.
IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE THE
SEARCH AND RESCUE IS THE
PRIORITY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IN 2015, WE SAW EUROPEAN
GOVERNMENTS ACTUALLY DO MORE TO
FUND SEARCH AND RESCUE
OPERATIONS, AND WE SAW A
DECREASE IN THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE WHO WERE DROWNING AT SEA.
UNFORTUNATELY, WHAT'S HAPPENED
SINCE THEN IS THAT EUROPEAN
GOVERNMENTS HAVE SHIFTED TO A
DIFFERENT STRATEGY, THEY CALL IT
A DETERRENT STRATEGY.
THEY WANT FEWER PEOPLE TO BE
LEAVING.
THE REALITY IS, PEOPLE ARE STILL
LEAVING AND THEY'RE DROWNING AT
SEA BECAUSE THERE ARE NOT ENOUGH
SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS
CURRENTLY GOING ON.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'VE SEEN
PICTURES OF SOME OF THESE BOATS
BEING DESTROYED BY SOME OF THESE
DIFFERENT EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, SO
WHAT'S THE KIND OF RIPPLE
EFFECT?
THAT THESE PEOPLE ARE NOW COMING
ON, WHAT, LESS STURDY BOATS?
>> THEY'RE ACTUALLY TAKING TO
THE SEAS IN MORE AND MORE UNSEA-
WORTHY VESSELS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE
GETTING ON A BOAT WITHOUT LIFE
JACKETS, WITHOUT A SATELLITE
PHONE, WITHOUT ENOUGH WATER OR
FOOD TO LAST FOR THE JOURNEY.
THEY'RE FLEEING MORE VIOLENCE,
EXTREME POVERTY.
THEY'RE SEEKING WHAT WE WOULD
SEEK IF WE WERE IN THEIR SHOES,
JUST TRYING TO REBUILD THERE
LIVES AND FIND SAFETY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WAS THE
SITUATION IN LIBYA, WHICH HAS
BECOME SUCH A LAUNCHING POINT
FOR THESE PEOPLE?
>> THE SITUATION IN LIBYA IS
DISASTROUS FOR THESE PEOPLE.
MANY OF THEM ARE BLACK AFRICAN.
THEY FACE RACISM.
THEY ARE BOUGHT AND SOLD, PUT
INTO SEXUAL EXPLOITATION, PUT
INTO SITUATIONS WHERE THEY'RE AT
RISK BEING KIDNAPPED, KILLED.
PEOPLE WHO ARE INTERCEPTED BY
THE LIBYAN COAST GUARD AND SENT
BACK TO LIBYA ARE PUT IN
DETENTION SITES WHERE THEY'RE
AT RISK OF RAPE AND TORTURE.
AND AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL, FOR
INSTANCE, TALKED TO ONE MAN WHO
SAID THAT HE HAD SEEN THREE
PEOPLE TORTURED.
THEY WERE USING TOILET WATER AS
DRINKING WATER.
SO, THESE CONDITIONS ARE
UNSPEAKABLY HORRIFIC.
>> Sreenivasan: HAVE THE
EUROPEAN NATIONS RESPONDED IN
ANY WAY, OR HAVE THEY THOUGHT
ABOUT CHANGING THEIR PRIORITIES?
>> UNFORTUNATELY, WHAT WE SAW
THIS WEEK FROM EUROPEAN LEADERS
WHO MET WAS ACTUALLY A DOUBLING
DOWN ON THIS POLICY.
THEY'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO TRY
TO FUND LIBYAN COAST GUARD TO
CONDUCT INTERCEPTION SEARCH AND
RESCUE OPERATIONS, BUT THEY'RE
NOT ACTUALLY DOING OVERSIGHT OF
LIBYAN COAST GUARD.
WE KNOW THAT LIBYAN COAST GUARD
IN SOME CASES ARE ACTUALLY
COOPERATING WITH SMUGGLERS.
THEY'RE CORRUPT.
THEY'VE TAKEN ACTUALLY GUNSHOTS
AT RESCUE BOATS THAT ARE
OPERATED BY NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS.
SO, THEY DO NOT HAVE THE BEST
INTERESTS OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
FLEEING AT HEART.
AND IN SOME CASES, WE'RE
ACTUALLY SEEING PEOPLE AT A MUCH
GREATER RISK BECAUSE OF THE
LIBYAN COAST GUARD.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
NAUREEN SHAH OF AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S LAWYERS ARE CALLING FOR
THE DISMISSAL OF A LAWSUIT FILED
AGAINST THE PRESIDENT, DATING
BACK TO HIS TIME HOSTING THE
REALITY TELEVISION SHOW, "THE
APPRENTICE."
IN COURT PAPERS FILED LAST
NIGHT, MR. TRUMP'S ATTORNEYS
ARGUE A SITTING PRESIDENT
CANNOT BE SUED IN A STATE COURT.
THE SUIT WAS FILED IN JANUARY
BY SUMMER ZERVOS, A FORMER
"APPRENTICE" CONTESTANT.
SHE ALLEGES MR. TRUMP SEXUALLY
HARASSED HER IN 2007, A YEAR
AFTER SHE APPEARED ON THE SHOW,
AND THEN DEFAMED HER DURING LAST
YEAR'S CAMPAIGN IN TWEETS AND
PUBLIC STATEMENTS, SAYING HER
STORY WAS FALSE.
THE SUPREME COURT RULED IN 1997
THAT A PRESIDENT CAN BE SUED FOR
PRIVATE CONDUCT WHILE IN
OFFICE; THAT WAS REGARDING THE
FEDERAL LAWSUIT AGAINST
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON BROUGHT
BY PAULA JONES WHICH LED TO HIS
IMPEACHMENT.
CANADA'S FAR-WESTERN PROVINCE OF
BRITISH COLUMBIA IS BATTLING
HUNDREDS OF WILDFIRES AND HAS
DECLARED ITS FIRST STATE OF
EMERGENCY IN 14 YEARS.
3,000 RESIDENTS HAVE BEEN TOLD
TO EVACUATE THEIR HOMES.
SOME HAVE BEEN DESTROYED, BUT NO
DEATHS ARE REPORTED.
ALMOST 140 NEW FIRES BROKE OUT
YESTERDAY, FANNED BY STRONG
WINDS AND HIGH TEMPERATURES
EXPECTED TO CONTINUE THROUGH THE
WEEKEND.
IN KENYA, POLICE SAY SUSPECTED
ISLAMIC MILITANTS FROM
NEIGHBORING SOMALIA BEHEADED
NINE MEN IN AN ATTACK ON A
VILLAGE OVERNIGHT.
VILLAGERS SAY THE ATTACKERS WENT
HOUSE TO HOUSE LOOKING FOR NON-
MUSLIM MEN.
MILITANTS OF THE AL-SHABAB GROUP
HAVE CARRIED OUT FREQUENT CROSS-
BORDER RAIDS SINCE 2011, WHEN
KENYA SENT TROOPS TO SOMALIA TO
FIGHT THE AL-QAEDA LINKED GROUP.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY:
AMID SHORTAGES OF FOOD AND
MEDICAL SERVICES, VENEZUELANS
ARE FLEEING TO NEIGHBORING
COLOMBIA.
>> Reporter: DR. GALVIS SAYS
WITH DIRE HOSPITAL CONDITIONS IN
VENEZUELA, MANY EXPECTING
MOTHERS FLOCK TO COLOMBIA TO
GIVE BIRTH.
HIS MATERNITY WARD TRAFFIC IS UP
100% THIS YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S TOMORROW
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
LEGEND OF AN ALIEN ENCOUNTER
KNOWN AS THE "ROSWELL INCIDENT"
WAS BORN 70 YEARS AGO TODAY IN
A REMOTE AREA OF THE NEW MEXICO
DESERT.
ON JULY 8, 1947, THE "ROSWELL
DAILY RECORD" HAD THIS SHOCKING
HEADLINE: "ROSWELL ARMY AIR
FIELD CAPTURES FLYING SAUCER ON
RANCH IN ROSWELL REGION."
THE NEXT DAY, MILITARY OFFICIALS
RETRACTED THE CLAIM, SAYING THE
DEBRIS FOUND ON THE RANCH WAS
FROM A HIGH-ALTITUDE WEATHER
BALLOON.
IN THE 1990s, THE PENTAGON
REVEALED IN A 1,000-PAGE REPORT
THAT IT HAD LAUNCHED THE BALLOON
AS A SECRET EXPERIMENT TO DETECT
CHANGES IN THE ATMOSPHERE CAUSED
BY SOVIET NUCLEAR TESTS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.